Conversion to continuous data For each detected respiration cycle we computed three measures: (1) respiration period (RP) is the duration of that cycle. We chose RP rather than the more common respiration rate, its inverse, in analogy to analysis of event-related cardiac responses where heart period has been shown to linearly relate to autonomic nervous system input (Berntson et al., 1995). (2) Respiration amplitude (RA) is the amplitude in rib cage excursion on that cycle, which linearly relates to current tidal volume (VT) (Binks et al., 2007). Since we did not make an attempt to derive the subject-specific proportionality constant relating RA to VT, we use the term RA rather than VT throughout the manuscript. (3) Respiration flow rate (RFR), RA/RP, which is linearly related to tidal volumetric flow rate, i.e. tidal volume per time unit. RFR is computed per cycle with variable duration. Otherwise it is similar to minute volume or RLL which are computed over fixed intervals. Each of these three measures was assigned to the start of the following inspiration cycle and linearly interpolated with 10 Hz sampling frequency. Interpolated data were then filtered twice with a unidirectional first-order Butterworth band pass filter. Initially we used cut-off frequencies of 0.01 Hz and 1 Hz, based on visual inspection of the power spectrum across all data sets and including a frequency band that contained a clearly visible power peak. To determine the optimal filtering method, we repeated the analysis by varying the high-pass frequency (0.001–1 Hz, 0.005–1 Hz, 0.05–1 Hz) and the low-pass frequency (0.01–0.5 Hz, 0.01–2 Hz, 0.01–5 Hz).
Continuous respiration measures were used for general linear models (see below). For derivation of response functions, data were extracted over an interval of [−5 s, 40 s] around each event. We then averaged data across all participants and trials for each experimental condition. This is different from previous work on skin conductance responses and evoked heart period responses, in which we used principal component analysis across all datasets and trials of each experiment condition to summarise responses (Bach et al., 2009, 2010b; Paulus et al., 2016). In the present dataset, however, principal components for all analyses resembled an approximate Fourier series and were therefore not informative about the shape of a respiration response. We therefore chose to use grand averages as for in example in a previous model of fearconditioned bradycardia (Castegnetti et al., 2016).